Pulmonary acini exhibit complex changes during postnatal rat
lung development
David Haberthür1 , Eveline Yao1 , Sébastien F. Barré1 , Tiziana P. Cremona1 , Stefan A.
Tschanz1 , and Johannes C. Schittny1
1

University of Bern

April 23, 2020
1

Abstract

2

Pulmonary acini represent the functional gas-exchanging units of the lung. Due to technical limitations, it is not possible
to identify individual acini on microscopic lung sections.

3

8

We imaged instillation-ﬁxed rat lungs at postnatal days P4, P10, P21, and P60 to overcome these limitations. Right lower
lobes of these lungs were imaged at the TOMCAT beamline of the Swiss Light Source synchrotron facility at a voxel size
of 1.48 μm. Individual acini (N=268) were segmented from the 3D data by closing the airways ways at the transition point
from conducting to gas exchanging airways. Acinar development was followed by estimating the individual acinar volume,
complexity, and number of alveoli.

9

The mean volume of the acini increases 23 times during the observed timeframe. The coeﬃcients of variation dropped from

10

1.26 to 0.49 and the diﬀerence between the mean volumes of the fraction of the 20 % smallest to the 20 % largest acini
decreased from a factor of 27.26 (day 4) to a factor of 4.07 (day 60), i.e. shows a smaller dispersion at later time points.

4
5
6
7

11

13

This indicates that the acinar volumes show a very large variation at early timepoints and homogenize during maturation
of the lung. Our approach is well suited to follow acinar development and to acquire stereologically correct data in a

14

time-eﬃcient manner. We found that the newly formed acini show a large size distribution which is reduced by a factor of

15

7 until adulthood. Most likely this leads to a more homogeneous ventilation in the lung.

16

1

17

1.1

12

18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34

Introduction
Lung development

Lung development starts with the formation of the two lung buds. During the embryonic stage (prenatal
days E11-E13 in rats) the major airways and the pleura are formed. During the pseudoglandular stage
(E13-E18.5) most of the remaining airway generations are formed by branching morphogenesis. Few
additional branches are added during the canalicular (E18.5 - E20) and maybe the saccular stage (E20
to postnatal day P4). Epithelial diﬀerentiation becomes morphologically visible during the canalicular
stage. Together with angiogenetic activation of the capillaries, this process leads to the ﬁrst functional
air-blood barriers in the lung.
The saccular stage represents an intermediate stage where branching morphogenesis ceases and the
developmental program switches to the phase of alveolarization. During alveolarization, 90 % of the adult
gas-exchange area is formed by the lifting oﬀ of new septa from the existing gas-exchange surface (1; 2; 3).
Alveolarization itself is divided into two distinct phases, the so-called classical (P4-P21) and continued
alveolarization (P14 to approximately P60).
During classical alveolarization, new septa are formed starting from preexisting immature septa which
contain a double-layered capillary network. During alveolarization, the structure of the alveolar septa
is changed to increase the eﬃciency of the lung. It includes the transformation of the double-layered
capillary network into a single-layered one. As a consequence, angiogenesis is necessary at the basis of the
newly forming septa. To distinguish these modes of the formation of new alveolar septa and to specify
1

39

that alveolarization continues after classical alveolarization ceased, the second phase of alveolarization
is called continued alveolarization. Here, the timing of lung development is given for rats while the same
stages and developmental mechanisms are observed in every placentalian species studied so far, including
humans. However, the timing of lung development and especially the time point of birth relative to lung
development is adapted in each species (3; 4; 5).

40

1.2

35
36
37
38

41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59

The functional lung units

Pulmonary acini represent the gas-exchanging units of the bronchial tree and are deﬁned as the airways
distal of the terminal bronchioles (6). In humans, the acini contain approximately four generations
of respiratory bronchioles before reaching the alveolar ducts. The alveolar ducts start at the so-called
bronchioalveolar duct junction (BADJ) where the lining of the inner airway surface abruptly changes
from the cuboidal epithelium of the bronchioles into type 1 and type 2 alveolar epithelium which covers
the alveoli. The small tree of airways distal of the BADJ is called a ventilatory unit (7). Since murine
lungs do not possess respiratory bronchioles, the murine acini consist of one single ventilatory unit (7).
In this study we used rat lungs; hence we exclusively speak of acini. To translate our results to humans,
monkeys, or dogs, one would have to compare a rat acinus to a single ventilatory unit in these species.
Developmentally, the BADJ is of particular interest. The junction is formed during the canalicular stage
when the epithelia are diﬀerentiating. Ciliated epithelia containing goblet or club cells form proximal
and type I and II alveolar epithelia form distal of the BADJ. The BADJ is home to various stem cells (7).
The generation of the airway in which an individual murine acinus starts is deﬁned during the canalicular
stage and remains constant once it is formed. As a consequence, the number of formed acini also remains
constant during the phase of alveolarization and thereafter (8; 9). The latter was somehow surprising
because the total lung volume increases by roughly a factor of 10 during alveolarization (10). Therefore,
the mean volume of the acini has to increase by approximately the same factor. Since the acinus volume
can easily be estimated with the Cavalieri principle (11), we can test if and how the acinus volume
increases during lung development.

68

However, besides the global numbers little is known about the range of the volume of individual acini
throughout lung development. The latter represents a physiological signiﬁcant value, because it has been
shown by pulmonary particle deposition (12; 13; 10) and by computational ﬂuid dynamics simulations
of airﬂow (14; 15; 16) that the acinar architecture is important for ventilation and particle deposition.
However, due to the lack of measured data, these simulations are based on acinar models. Therefore, the
question of how well these models represent lung physiology remains open until the necessary data and
physiologically correct models are available. To contribute to the validation of the computational ﬂuid
dynamics simulations, we determined the volume and number of alveoli in individual acini throughout
rat lung development.

69

1.3

60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67

70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83

Acinus detection and delineation

To detect and delineate individual acini, three-dimensional information is needed. On single twodimensional (histological) sections it is not possible to unambiguously detect which parts of the airways
and alveoli in the lung parenchyma are connected three-dimensionally. Historically, single or very few
acini were delineated and extracted from manually traced serial sections (17; 18) or sectioned silicone
casts (19), both with considerable manual work. Non-destructive three-dimensional imaging is best
suited to acquire data sets that can be used to easily detect, delineate and study large amounts of single
acini. This has been shown by Vasilescu et al. (20). In their study, they reconstructed 22 mouse acini
from tomographic data sets of four 12 week old mice (at least postnatal day 84, fully developed lungs)
and compared those with scanning electron microscope images of acinar silicone rubber casts. Similarly,
Kizhakke Puliyakote et al. (21) analyzed the volume of 32 mouse acini from six animals, as well as the
branching pattern of their internal airways. All prior work known to us has analyzed considerably fewer
acini than the 268 acini presented in this manuscript and - due to the study design - focuses only on one
time point, where the lungs of the animals are already fully developed while we are wable to analyze the
acini over the course of postnatal lung development.

2

89

The hereby presented method is well adapted to thoroughly analyze large amounts of acini in a timeeﬃcient manner. The largest part of the work is spent on the detailed stereological analysis of the
extracted acini. The method makes it possible to provide data spanning relevant parts of the lung development in animals. As conﬁrmed by Vasilescu et al. (22), stereologically analyzing microtomographic
data provides quantitative information on internal structures of the lung while preserving the samples
for further studies.

90

2

91

2.1

84
85
86
87
88

92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103

Materials & Methods
Rat lung samples

In the present study, a superset of the animals described by Haberthür et al. (23) were used. Tschanz et
al. (10) described a biphasic formation of new alveoli on the same set of animals. The stereological analysis
presented here represents a part of the 3R-initiative (replacement, reduction, and reﬁnement) (24) for
the ethical use and the reduction of the number of animals sacriﬁced for science.
Brieﬂy, we extracted the lungs of Sprague-Dawley rats after having deeply anesthetized them with a
mixture of medetomidine, midazolam, and fentanyl (25). The rats were euthanized by exsanguination
during the removal of the lung. The lungs were ﬁxed with 2.5 % glutaraldehyde by intratracheal instillation and kept under constant pressure (20 cm H2 O) during ﬁxation to prevent recoiling of the tissue.
The samples were prepared for tomographic imaging by post-ﬁxation with 1 % osmium tetroxide and
staining with 4 % uranyl acetate, as well as by dehydration in a graded series of ethanol and embedding
in paraﬃn. In total we assessed 12 animals, on postnatal days P4, P10, P21, and P60 (N=3 per day.
From now on, we will omit the postnatal preﬁx and only mention the day.).

108

The animals were housed in the central animal facility of the University of Bern. They received food and
water ad libitum at a 12/12 hours day/night cycle. The experiments themselves, as well as the handling
of the animals before and during the experiments, were approved and supervised by the Federal Food
Safety and Veterinary Oﬃce of Switzerland and the Department of Agriculture and Nature of the Kanton
of Bern in Switzerland.

109

2.2

104
105
106
107

110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128

Tomographic imaging

Tomographic imaging was performed at the TOMCAT beamline (26; 27) of the Swiss Light Source
at the Paul Scherrer Institute in Villigen, Switzerland. The samples were scanned at an X-ray energy
of 20.0 keV. After penetrating the sample, the X-rays were converted into visible light by either a
20-μm-thick LuAG:Ce or 18-μm-thick YAG:Ce scintillator screen (both from Crytur, Turnov, Czech
Republic), depending on the date of experiments. The resulting visible light was magniﬁed using a 10times magnifying, diﬀraction-limited microscope lens and recorded with a 2048×2048 pixel CCD camera
(pco.2000, PCO, Kelheim, Germany) with 14 bits dynamic range operated in 2 by 2 binning mode. As a
result, in a single ﬁeld of view, we were able to image a sample volume of a cube of 1.5 mm side length
with a voxel side length of 1.48 μm, with the exposure time of the single projections varying between
160 and 200 ms.
Since our samples were substantially larger than the ﬁeld of view of the detector, we applied the socalled wide-ﬁeld scanning method (28) to increase the ﬁeld of view horizontally. For each sub-scan, we
recorded 3578 projections and laterally stitched them so that their combined ﬁeld of view covered the
whole sample width. Additionally, two or three such wide-ﬁeld scans were stacked vertically to match
the sample height.
The resulting data sets for each of the lung samples covered a ﬁeld of view of a cube with approximately
4.5 mm side length which corresponds to an image stack with approximately 3000×3000×3000 pixels at
1.48 μm side length each. The mean size of the tomographic reconstructions, corresponding to the raw
data of each of the 42 analyzed tomographic scans is 8 GB, totaling to 336 GB.

3

129

130
131
132
133
134
135
136

2.3

Extraction of acini

For the present manuscript, we extracted single acini from three-dimensional data, acquired without
destroying the samples. Details of this semi-automatic extraction of the rat acini are described by Haberthür et al. (23). We applied this protocol to extract 701 randomly selected acini throughout lung
development, at postnatal days 4, 10, 21 and 60. Individual acini were extracted from the tomographic
data with a custom image processing network established in MeVisLab (version 2.1, 2010-07-26 release, MeVis Medical Solutions and Fraunhofer MEVIS-Institute for Medical Image Computing, Bremen,
Germany).

142

This extraction was performed by segmenting the acinus volume with a gray-level threshold-based region
growing algorithm using manually placed seed points. To isolate individual acini in the data set we placed
disk-shaped segmentation stoppers at the acinus entrances. Each individual acinus was then exported as
a single DICOM ﬁle for portability. For each acinus, its exported DICOM ﬁle contained the segmented
acinus overlaid with the original background for further analysis. Example images from the DICOM ﬁles
are shown in the bottom row of Fig 1.

143

2.4

137
138
139
140
141

144
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
154
155
156
157

Stereological analysis of alveolar characteristics

The stereological estimation of the alveolar number was performed according to the standards for quantitative assessment of lung structure from the American Thoracic Society (29) to guarantee accurate
and unbiased results. To perform the stereological analysis, each DICOM ﬁle from the isolated acini was
sampled into a systematic random set of single images using a MATLAB script (30).
The stereological assessment was performed with the STEPanizer (31), an easy-to-use software tool for
the stereological assessment of digital images. Details of the stereological assessment have previously
been described (32). Brieﬂy, we counted the appearance or disappearance of alveolar wall interruptions.
Under the assumption that these only occur in the region of the alveolar mouth opening and correspond
to alveolar entrance rings (33) we counted said interruptions on paired images spanning the whole acinus
volume. By using the disector method (34) we were thus able to estimate the number of alveoli in 268 of
the 701 exported acini. The acini we analyzed were subsampled from the full data by systematic uniform
random sampling (35). Brieﬂy, a deﬁned fraction of the acini of one animal were analyzed, e.g. one third.
During segmentation, the acini were numbered. Based on these numbers every third acinus was selected,
randomly starting with the ﬁrst, second, or third one.

164

Previously, we have shown that the stereological assessment of the acinar volume (according to the
Cavalieri principle (36)) gives comparable results to an automated volume extraction by counting the
segmented pixels in the tomographic data sets (32). Due to variations in the gray value, the automatic
segmentation underestimates the volume of the single acini. The best-suited approach to obtain unbiased
results is to asses the volume manually according to the Cavalieri principle, which is what we did for the
268 acini presented in this manuscript. The sets of JPG slices and the raw results from the stereological
analysis with the STEPanizer are available on request.

165

2.5

158
159
160
161
162
163

166
167
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176

Data analysis and display

All the stereologically assessed data was processed in a Jupyter (37) notebook, producing all the results,
including the statistical data and plots shown below. The notebook with all its history is freely available on
GitHub (38). The performed calculations are described in detail in section 3. In the plots, semitransparent
circles mark the single observations. The box shows the 25-75 % quartiles range of the data. The whiskers
extend to the rest of the distribution. Outliers are determined as a function of the inter-quartile range and
are shown outside the whiskers. Numerical values in the text are given as averages±standard deviation.
P-values in the text and ﬁgure legends are given as precise numbers, as suggested by Amhrein et al. (39).
Usually, we performed a Shapiro-Wilk test for normality (40) to test whether we can use an U-test
for assessing the diﬀerences, namely a two-sided Mann-Whitney rank test (41). This rank test was
used to assess the diﬀerences between the possible combinations. An additional Kruskal-Wallis H-test
for independent samples (42) was used to test for sample independence. The statistical analysis was

4

178

performed in the aforementioned notebook by using the statistical functions of the Scientiﬁc Computing
Tools for Python (43) or GraphPad Prism 7.01 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA).

179

3

177

180
181
182
183
184
185
186

Results

The number of alveoli per acinus was assessed for 268 individual acini throughout postnatal lung development at days 4, 10, 21 and 60. For day 4, we analyzed 125 acini, for day 10 we analyzed 58 acini, for
day 21 we analyzed 42 acini, and for day 60 we analyzed 43 acini.
To get started, we show an overview of our process in ﬁgure 1. Panels A-D show a representative light
microscopy image for each assessed time point. Panels E-H of ﬁgure 1 each correspond to one slice of the
tomographic data sets acquired at TOMCAT. Panels I-L of ﬁgure 1 show the middle slice of the datasets
used for the stereological analysis of the extracted acini. The acinus is shown in light gray as an overlay
over the tomographic data.

Figure 1: Example images for each of the assessed time points. A-D: Representative light microscopy
images. E-H: One slice of the tomographic data sets. I-L: Middle slice of one of the extracted acini. The
extracted acinus is overlaid on the tomographic dataset. Panels J and K also show the segmentation
stopper at the left border of the image. The shown images correspond to the middle slice of the full
data sets used for the stereological analysis. The scale bar was burnt in during preparation of the image
stacks and is 100 μm long. Panels A, E & I: Day 4. Panels B, F & J: Day 10. Panels C, G & K: Day
21. Panels D, H & L: Day 60.
187

188

3.1

Alveoli per acinus

191

The average entrance ring count, which corresponds to the number of alveoli per acinus for the 125 acini
at day 4 is 48±41 alveoli. For the 58 acini at day 10 it is 89±84 alveoli, for the 42 acini at day 21 it is
233±164 alveoli. At day 60 we assessed 43 acini in total, on average they have 702±219 alveoli.

192

The values for the single animal are given in table 1 and plotted in ﬁgure 2.

193

The alveolar number shows highly signiﬁcant diﬀerences (Šidák-corrected p-value < 0.00167 (44)) between all possible combination of days. All possible combinations of entrance ring counts per day are

189
190

194

5

Animal
04A
04B
04C
10A
10B
10C
21B
21D
21E
60B
60D
60E

Assessed acini
51
23
51
27
14
17
14
17
11
24
10
9

Average counts
26.73
65.04
60.51
77.85
84.57
108.76
208.14
196.0
323.09
701.75
668.3
739.11

STD
23.56
43.85
45.42
56.31
65.75
125.45
197.71
128.56
145.94
230.95
121.67
281.22

Minimum
4
15
10
18
23
15
35
50
108
322
444
272

Maximum
111
171
249
245
199
505
781
493
572
1296
810
1204

Table 1: Detailed alveolar numbers for each animal.

Figure 2: Distribution of the number of alveoli per acinus (entrance ring count per acinus) for each
animal. Left: linear scale, right: logarithmic scale. The entrance ring counts per day are all signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent (all p-values better than 1.9e-5, which is the one between days 4 and 10).

196

signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (all p-values are better than p=1.9e-5, which is the p-value of the diﬀerence between days 4 and 10). The entrance ring counts for all animals are independent (p=1.6e-34).

197

3.2

195

198
199
200
201
202
203
204

Acinus volume

The stereological assessment resulted in a mean acinar volume of 0.03±0.04 mm3 for the 125 acini at
day 4. For the 58 acini at day 10 we get a volume of 0.04±0.05 mm3 . For the 42 acini at day 21 a volume
of 0.10±0.09 mm3 and for the 43 acini at day 60 a volume of 0.74±0.37 mm3 .
The values for the single animals are shown in table 2 and displayed in ﬁgure 3. The mean volume of the
20 % smallest acini to the 20 % largest acini at day 4 increases 27.47 times (from 0.0035 μl to 0.095 μl,
N=25). At day 10, this increase is 15.28 times (from 0.0071 μl to 0.11 μl, N=12). At day 21, this increase
is 14.42 times (from 0.018 μl to 0.26 μl, N=8). At day 60, we saw an increase of 3.94 times (from 0.33 μl

6

Animal
04A
04B
04C
10A
10B
10C
21B
21D
21E
60B
60D
60E

Assessed acini

Average [mm^3]

STD [mm^3]

Minimum [mm^3]

Maximum [mm^3]

51
23
51
27
14
17
14
17
11
24
10
9

0.01
0.06
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.06
0.09
0.11
0.12
0.59
0.89
0.98

0.01
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.08
0.09
0.11
0.07
0.22
0.35
0.53

0.0
0.01
0.01
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.01
0.01
0.03
0.23
0.36
0.19

0.04
0.19
0.28
0.11
0.1
0.33
0.32
0.38
0.24
1.1
1.58
1.88

Table 2: Detailed volume data (in mm3 ) for each animal.

205

to 1.3 μl, N=9).

Figure 3: Distribution of the acinar volumes for each animal. Left: linear scale, right: logarithmic scale.
The acinar volumes are all signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (all p-values better than 4.5e-6, which is the one between
days 10 and 21) for each combination of days except between days 4 and 10 (p=0.08).
206
207
208
209
210

The acinar volumes show highly signiﬁcant diﬀerences between all possible combinations of days except
between days 4 and 10 (p=0.08). All other p-values are better than p=4.5e-6, which is the p-value for
the diﬀerence between days 10 and 21. The statistical analysis is equal to what is brieﬂy described
for the entrance ring count above. The acinar volumes for animals 21E and all animals of day 60 are
non-normally distributed, but all acinar volumes per animal are independent (p=5e-29).

7

211

212
213
214
215

3.3

Alveoli per volume

The mean number of alveoli for the 125 acini at day 4 is 2166±1132 alveoli per mm3 . For the 58 acini
at day 10 we counted 2831±1189 alveoli per mm3 , for the 42 acini at day 21 2723±771 alveoli per mm3
and for the 43 acini at day 60 1080±349 alveoli per mm3 . These numbers were found by dividing the
counted entrance rings by the acinus volumes.
The numbers for the single animals are shown in table 3 and displayed in ﬁgure 4.
Animal
04A
04B
04C
10A
10B
10C
21B
21D
21E
60B
60D
60E

Assessed
acini
51
23
51
27
14
17
14
17
11
24
10
9

Average
[mm^-3]
3124
1363
1569
2685
3091
2848
2642
2534
3119
1249
838
898

STD
[mm^-3]
1152
499
380
1022
1166
1462
493
895
775
297
271
323

Minimum
[mm^-3]
1618
679
799
1246
1890
1182
1625
1111
1604
530
476
411

Maximum
[mm^-3]
8208
2704
2775
5582
5422
7009
3344
4032
4379
1912
1221
1463

Table 3: Details of alveolar density (number per mm3 ) per acinus volume for each animal.

Figure 4: Number of alveoli per acinus volume. Left: linear scale, right: logarithmic scale. The number
of alveoli per acinus volume are all signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (all p-values are better than 5e-5, which is the
one between days 4 and 21) for each combination of days except between days 10 and 21 (p=0.7).
216
217
218
219

The counts per volume, which correspond to the number of alveoli per acinus volume are a value for
estimating the complexity of the single acini. This acinus complexity shows highly signiﬁcant diﬀerences
between all possible combinations of days except between days 10 and 21 (p=0.7). All other days have a
8

222

p-value better than p=5e-5, this being the one between days 4 and 21. The statistical analysis is equal
to what is brieﬂy described for the entrance ring count above. The counts per volume for all animals
except 04A are non-normally distributed, but all are independent (p=2.9e-21).

223

3.4

220
221

Number of acini

229

The number of acini for day 4 was 18260±16555 acini, for day 10 14359±5611 acini, for day 21 11203±2681
acini and for day 60 4277±777 acini. These numbers were obtained by dividing the parenchymal volume
of the lungs (10) with the Cavalieri-estimated volume of the acini. To calculate these data we had to
use data of two diﬀerent studies. Most likely due to error propagation, we observed a large standard
deviation. In the end the number of acini do not diﬀer signiﬁcantly between the days and is not diﬀerent
to the value published by Barre et al. (8).

230

3.5

224
225
226
227
228

Total number of alveoli per lung

235

The total alveolar number for day 4 was found to be 0.64±0.34 million alveoli, for day 10 1.23±0.39
million alveoli, for day 21 2.65±0.57 million alveoli, and for day 60 3.01±0.58 million alveoli. The total
number of acini was estimated by dividing the mean parenchymal volume of the lungs (10), by the
shrinkage-corrected stereologically estimated acinar volume. The number of alveoli is then simply the
multiplication of the average entrance ring count with the estimated number of acini.

236

3.6

231
232
233
234

Volume of individual alveoli

242

The mean volume of one alveolus for day 4 was 686151 μm3 , for day 10 452285 μm3 , for day 21 445373 μm3
and for day 60 1053526 μm3 . This corresponds to an average diameter per alveolus of 109 μm, 95 μm,
95 μm, and 126 μm for days 4, 10, 21 and 60, respectively. The average volume of one alveolus was
estimated by dividing the mean acinar volume by the mean count of alveoli for each day separately.
The average diameter was estimated by assuming spherical alveoli and solving the volume equation of a
sphere to the diameter.

243

4

237
238
239
240
241

Discussion

258

To our best knowledge, the present manuscript is the ﬁrst to quantitatively describe the changes in the
volumes of single rat lung acini based on stereological analysis of a large number of individual acini.
In addition, we can easily estimate the number of acini during lung development from our data and
compare this to prior work. There are some limitations to our results though; for technical reasons, we
only assessed the acini in the lower medial tip of the right lower lung lobe. However, it was previously
shown that the right lower lobe is a valid sample for the entire lung (8) and that information drawn from
one lobe is representative for the whole lung (45). Furthermore, based on stereological data, Zeltner
et al. (45) were able to show that the lung parenchyma is quite homogeneous. Looking at individual
acini, Kizhakke Puliyakote et al. (21) observed that the peripheral, pleura facing acini possess an acinar
volume which is two thirds larger than the volume of the central ones. However, they did not report
additional regional diﬀerences, e.g. between acini located cranially and caudally. Own preliminary data
are indicative for the same result. We imaged an entire rat lung in situ immediately post mortem
using high resolution synchrotron radiation based X-ray tomographic microscopy (46). A ﬁrst analysis
of regional diﬀerence show similar results as mentioned above. Therefore, we believe that our sample is
more than suitable for the drawn conclusions.

259

4.1

244
245
246
247
248
249
250
251
252
253
254
255
256
257

260
261
262
263

Acinus volumes

The mean acinar volume signiﬁcantly increases during lung development from postnatal days 10 to 60
with all p-values better than 4.5e-6. No signiﬁcant diﬀerence was observed between postnatal days 4 and
10 (1.2×increase, p=0.08). A large part of the acinus volume increase happens after day 21 (compare
Fig. 3), which is consistent with previous literature (10; 1).

9

264
265
266
267
268
269
270
271
272
273
274
275
276
277
278
279
280
281
282
283
284
285
286

As mentioned in the introduction, Barré et al. (8) have shown that the number of acini remains constant during lung development. This is somewhat surprising since the total lung volume increases by
roughly a factor of 11 during alveolarization. Therefore, we expect the mean volume of the acini to
increase by at least the same factor (8; 10).
We observed that the mean volume of acini increases 22.66 times between days 4 and 60 (p=1.8e-22) which
corresponds to an approximately 23 times increase of the total lung volume. The other combinations of
increases were: day 4 to day 21: 3.18×(p=1.3e-9), day 10 to day 21: 2.60×(p=4.5e-6), day 10 to day
60: 18.46×(p=1.4e-17), day 21 to day 60: 7.11×(p=7.1e-15). The increase from day 4 to day 10 was not
signiﬁcant (p=0.08) at 1.23×).
During the same time, the coeﬃcients of variation of the acinus volumes dropped from 1.26 to 0.49 but
the diﬀerence between the mean volumes of the fraction of the 20 % smallest and 20 % largest acini
decreased from a factor of 27.47 (day 4) to a factor of 3.94 (day 60). This indicates that the dispersion of
the value is based on an entirely diﬀerent pattern of distribution of acinar sizes and that the diﬀerence of
the mean acinus volumes from the smallest to the largest fraction per day becomes smaller and smaller
during postnatal lung development.
When comparing the acinus volumes normalized to the largest volume per day, we found that the volumes
are closer together on day 4 and are spread out more on the other days (Fig. 5). Additionally, at days
4, 10 and 21 the distribution of the normalized volumes is skewed towards below the average (median of
normalized volumes at day 4: 0.16, at day 10: 0.18 and at day 21: 0.23), which means that we have more
smaller than larger acini early in the development. At day 60, the distribution is more homogeneous,
with the median of the normalized acinus volumes at exactly 0.50. This result let us speculate that acinar
growth is not constant during lung development. It seems that some acini increase their volume faster
than others. As a result we speculate that an increased percentage of acini is somehow dormant at day
4-21, while at day 60 most of the acini reached their ﬁnal volume.

Figure 5: Normalized acinar volumes. The spread of the volumes is small early in the development and
skewed towards the lower end of the volumes. At day 60, the median is exactly in the middle of the
normalized volumes.
287
288
289
290

By dividing the parenchymal volumes of each lung estimated by Tschanz et al. (Table 1, (10)) by the
mean number of acini estimated by Barré et al. (9) we can estimate the mean acinar volume for each day.
The acinus volume we estimated by point counting (Cavalieri estimation) are on average 2.07 times lower
10

299

but show a similar increase over the studied period (data shown in supplementary Fig. 7).It appears that
the comparison between data obtained by stereology based on classical paraﬃn sections or on any kind of
3D-imaging has it limitation if it comes to the absolute numbers. First, due to the coast of Britain-eﬀect
the exact value of every surface measurement is depending on the resolution of the imaging method (47).
Second, the thickness of the alveolar septa in 3D-imaging data is heavily depending on the segmentation
between airspace and tissue - regardless if it is done manually or by a computed algorithm. We observed
that the airspace volumes obtained by 3D-imaging has a tendency to be smaller than the ones determined
using classical paraﬃn sections. However, the relative numbers obtained in one study match the ones of
other studies quite well.

300

4.2

291
292
293
294
295
296
297
298

301
302
303
304
305
306
307

Acinus complexity, alveoli per volume

The volume and shape of the alveoli, alveolar ducts, and the acini are critical parameters for ventilation
and particle deposition (48; 49; 50). Particle deposition, for example, is relatively low during the ﬁrst two
weeks of a rats’ life, high at postnatal day P21 and medium at days P36-P90 (13; 12). This correlates well
with our results, where we found a signiﬁcantly larger acinus complexity (number of alveoli per acinus
volume) at days 10 and 21 compared to days 4 and 60 (p-values all better than 5.4e-5, which is the one
for day 4 vs. day 21). Kreyling et al. (13) report a maximal retention of gold nanoparticles at this time
point (see their Fig. 1).

313

Tschanz et al. (10) stereologically estimated the mean total acinar volume as the sum of ductal and
alveolar air spaces. The mean volume of the individual alveoli was found to be smallest around postnatal
day 21 (see their Fig. 4). We thus postulate a high acinar complexity at days 10 and 21 while early and
late in the lung development, the acinar complexity is relatively low. This also correlates with structural
changes. In rats, the alveolar air spaces are large during the ﬁrst two weeks of life, small at day P21 and
medium afterward (10).

314

4.3

308
309
310
311
312

Number of acini

317

Previously, it was shown that the number of acini remains constant during postnatal lung development
from day 4 to 60 (8), with a mean of 5612±547 acini per lung. Based on the acinar and parenchymal
volume we calculated the number of acini and were able to verify the previously reported result.

318

4.4

315
316

319
320
321
322
323
324

Total alveolar number

In this study, we assessed the number of alveoli per acinus. The alveolar number we get (0.64±0.34,
1.23±0.39, 2.65±0.57, 3.01±0.58 million alveoli for days 4, 10, 21 and 60, respectively) have to be seen in
the context of the results shown by Tschanz et al. (0.823±0.01, 3.538±1.26, 14.303±3.08 and 19.297±3.06
million alveoli, (10), Table 1). On average, our results are ﬁve times smaller but show the same trend
when linearly corrected with a factor of 5.04. The values from Tschanz et al. overlap well with our linearly
scaled values, as seen in Fig. 6.

333

As shown in a study of Osmanagic et al. (51) the total alveolar number shows a large variability between
diﬀerent labs. E.g. the reported total number of alveoli in adult C57BL6 mice diﬀers by a factor of
approximately 8. These studies were all performend in labs well-known for their quality of stereologybased investigations of lung morphology. Therefore, any simple bias or methodical error may not account
for the reported diﬀerences. It seems to be that the total number of alveoli is dependent on unknown small
methodical diﬀerences. However, the relative numbers are surely reliable, especially, if the comparison
is done in groups of animals processed in parallel and counted by the same operator. We assessed the
same lungs as Tschanz et al. (10), but based on a very diﬀerent imaging method and with two diﬀerent
persons performing the stereological assessment. The latter two points may explain the factor of 5.04.

334

4.5

325
326
327
328
329
330
331
332

335
336

Volumes of individual alveoli

By dividing the alveolar air space by the number of alveoli we can estimate a mean alveolar volume of
5.91e5 μm3 for day 4, of 2.49e5 μm3 for day 10, of 1.34e5 μm3 for day 21, and 2.93e5 μm3 for day 60.

11

Figure 6: Number of alveoli based on data from Tschanz et al. (10) together with our linearly scaled data
(our data multiplied by 5.04). Values are plotted with a band of the width of their standard deviation.

341

On average, our values are 2.48 times larger than the volumes of the single alveoli as calculated from
data shown in Table 1 of Tschanz et al. (10) (day 4: 6.87e5 μm3 , day 10: 4.52e5 μm3 , day 21 4.45e5 μm3
and day 60 1.05e6 μm3 ), but scale equally during postnatal lung development. Tschanz et al. estimated
the total alveolar volume without the alveolar ducts. Since we directly estimated the volume fraction of
the alveoli per acinus our number is actually expected to be larger.

342

4.6

337
338
339
340

343
344
345
346
347
348
349
350
351
352
353
354

Physiological relevance of the acinar size

It has been predicted by computational ﬂuid dynamics simulations and by to-scale experiments that the
amount and location of massless particle deposition, as well as ventilation are depending on the size
of the acini. The predictions could be conﬁrmed at least in one case, where mice received ﬂuorescent
particles during mechanical ventilation. In 3D-visualizations the particles were predominately detected
in the proximal half of the acini (52).
Based on the above-mentioned knowledge and the data of this study, we propose the following. In very
small acini as the smallest ones we observed at postnatal day 4 acinar ﬂows are mainly characterized
by radial streamlines. Massless particle deposition is governed by diﬀusion (53). As the acini increase
in size, convective transport becomes more and more dominant in the proximal regions of the acini.
In larger acini, the proximal region shows a much higher particle retention than the distal once. The
proximal regions may even be viewed analogous to a ﬁlter capturing the particles whereas the distal
regions do not receive signiﬁcant amounts (14; 16; 54).

361

Multi-breath gas-washout is also dependent on the size of the acini. Based on computational simulations
of nitrogen multi-breath gas-washout it has been shown that small acini washout faster at the beginning
and slower at the end of the washout as compared to larger acini (15). Not surprisingly, the distribution of
the acinar sizes in terms of their range has also an inﬂuence on the gas-washout. Furthermore, a clustering
versus an even distribution of the locations of acinar similar sizes eﬀects gas-washout. Therefore, the
question where an acinus of which size is located in the lungs has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on pulmonary
ventilation and particle deposition.

362

The larger distribution of the acinar sizes at day 4 as compared to day 60 let us speculate what this

355
356
357
358
359
360

12

363
364
365
366
367
368

may mean biologically. Physiologically, a larger distribution implies a less homogeneous ventilation and
an increased gas-washout time. Therefore, the decrease of the inhomogeneity of the acinar sizes may be
understood as an optimization of gas-exchange in adult animals.
The consideration of the location is not only a theoretical consideration, because it has been shown in
adult mice that the acini close to the pleura are larger than central ones (21). Therefore, acini of diﬀerent
size are not evenly distributed in the lungs.

371

To our best knowledge, very few data characterizing acinar properties was available up to now. This is
especially true for lung development. Therefore, the data of the hereby presented study can contribute
to the improvements of computational simulations of pulmonary ventilation and particle deposition.

372

5

369
370

Conclusion

380

We conclude that our method is well suited to eﬃciently extract precise qualitative and quantitative
values of large amounts of single acini from non-destructive three-dimensional tomographic data sets.
The underlying stereological analysis can be eﬃciently performed on tomographic data sets, the analysis
of the stereological data was performed in a reproducible manner. Besides, our method enabled us to
maximize the number of investigations per sample, thus reducing the number of sacriﬁced animals. We
conclude that newly formed acini show a large size distribution which is reduced by a factor of 7 until
adulthood. Most likely the latter leads to a more homogeneous ventilation of the lung and an increase
of gas-washout which is equal to a decreased in the number of breaths needed for gas-washout.

381

6

373
374
375
376
377
378
379

Acknowledgments

385

We thank Mohammed Ouanella and Bettina de Breuyn for expert technical assistance. Federica Marone
and Bernd Pinzer were of paramount importance with their support at the TOMCAT beamline. Fluri
Wieland was of great help with the statistical analysis. We are thankful for the support by the Swiss
National Science Foundation (grants 310030_153468 and 310030_175953).

386

7

382
383
384

Contributions

390

JS conceived the project. DH, SB and JS performed the tomographic data acquisition. DH segmented the
acini. EY and DH analyzed the acini stereologically. DH, ST, TC and JS analyzed the data. DH wrote
the manuscript and generated all the ﬁgures. ST and JS contributed to writing, all authors proof-read
the manuscript.

391

8

392

No conﬂicts of interest, ﬁnancial or otherwise, are declared by the authors.

393

9

387
388
389

Disclosures

Supplementary ﬁgures

13

Figure 7: Plot of the mean acinar volumes. By dividing the parenchymal volumes of each lung estimated
by Tschanz et al. (Table 1, (Tschanz 2014)) by the mean number of acini estimated by Barré et al. (9)
we can estimate the mean acinar volume for each measured time point (blue plot). We assessed the
volumes of the acini by point counting (Cavalieri estimation, orange plot). Our volumes of the acini are
on average 2.07 times lower but show a similar increase over the studied period. While the estimation
based on Tschanz et al. is from the entire right middle lobe and on Barré et al. globally for the whole
organ, our estimation is solely based on the stereological analysis of the acini in the lower medial tip of
the right lower lung lobe.

Figure 8: Plot of the estimated number of acini. The blue plot shows our estimation, based on the
division of the parenchymal volume by the average volume of the acini. The orange plot is based on the
data shown by Barre et al. (9; 8).

394

395
396
397
398
399
400
401

References
30.
DicomReaderAndSaverForSTEPanizer.m
com/habi/098f542e7a6b5f8540490eed5a0f846a.
098f542e7a6b5f8540490eed5a0f846a.

[Online].

https://gist.github.
https://gist.github.com/habi/

39. Amrhein V, Greenland S, McShane B. Scientists rise up against statistical signiﬁcance. Nature
567: 305–307, 2019.
8. Barré SF, Haberthür D, Cremona TP, Stampanoni M, Schittny JC. The total number of
acini remains constant throughout postnatal rat lung development. American Journal of Physiology-

14

402

Lung Cellular and Molecular Physiology 311: L1082–L1089, 2016.

403

9. Barré SF, Haberthür D, Stampanoni M, Schittny JC. Eﬃcient estimation of the total number
of acini in adult rat lung. Physiological Reports 2: e12063, 2014.

404
405
406
407
408
409
410
411
412
413
414
415
416

46. Borisova E, Lovric G, Miettinen A, Fardin L, Bayat S, Larsson A, Stampanoni M,
Schittny JC, Schlepütz CM. Micrometer-resolution X-ray tomographic full-volume reconstruction of
an intact post-mortem juvenile rat lung.. Histochem Cell Biol. .
1. Burri PH, Dbaly J, Weibel ER. The postnatal growth of the rat lung. I. Morphometry. The
Anatomical Record 178: 711–730, 1974.
11. CRUZ-ORIVE LM. Precision of Cavalieri sections and slices with local errors. Journal of Microscopy 193: 182–198, 1999.
36. Cruz-Orive LM. Precision of Cavalieri sections and slices with local errors. Journal of Microscopy
193: 182–198, 1999.
25. Erhardt W, Kölle P, Henke J, Haberstroh J, Baumgartner C, Tacke S. Anästhesie und
Analgesie beim Klein-und Heimtier: mit Exoten, Labortieren, Vögeln, Reptilien, Amphibien und Fischen.
Schattauer Verlag, 2012.

418

14. Fishler R, Hofemeier P, Etzion Y, Dubowski Y, Sznitman J. Particle dynamics and deposition in true-scale pulmonary acinar models. Scientiﬁc Reports 5, 2015.

419

24. Flecknell P. Replacement, reduction and reﬁnement.. ALTEX 19: 73–8, 2002.

420

32. Haberthur D, Barre SF, Tschanz SA, Yao E, Stampanoni M, Schittny JC. Visualization
and stereological characterization of individual rat lung acini by high-resolution X-ray tomographic
microscopy. Journal of Applied Physiology 115: 1379–1387, 2013.

417

421
422

425

28. Haberthür D, Hintermüller C, Marone F, Schittny JC, Stampanoni M. Radiation dose
optimized lateral expansion of the ﬁeld of view in synchrotron radiation X-ray tomographic microscopy.
Journal of Synchrotron Radiation 17: 590–599, 2010.

426

38. Haberthür D. habi/acinar-analysis: Zenodo. .

427

23. Haberthür D, Barré SF, Tschanz SA, Yao E, Stampanoni M, Schittny JC. Visualization
and stereological characterization of individual rat lung acini by high-resolution X-ray tomographic
microscopy. Journal of Applied Physiology 115: 1379–1387, 2013.

423
424

428
429
430
431
432
433
434
435
436
437
438
439
440
441
442
443
444
445

6. Haefeli-Bleuer B, Weibel ER. Morphometry of the human pulmonary acinus. The Anatomical
Record 220: 401–414, 1988.
15. Hasler D, Anagnostopoulou P, Nyilas S, Latzin P, Schittny J, Obrist D. A multi-scale
model of gas transport in the lung to study heterogeneous lung ventilation during the multiple-breath
washout test. PLOS Computational Biology 15: e1007079, 2019.
49. Henry FS, Haber S, Haberthür D, Filipovic N, Milasinovic D, Schittny JC, Tsuda A.
The Simultaneous Role of an Alveolus as Flow Mixer and Flow Feeder for the Deposition of Inhaled
Submicron Particles. Journal of Biomechanical Engineering 134: 121001, 2012.
16. Hofemeier P, Sznitman J. Role of Alveolar Topology on Acinar Flows and Convective Mixing.
Journal of Biomechanical Engineering 136, 2014.
29. Hsia CC, Hyde DM, Ochs M, Weibel ER. An oﬃcial research policy statement of the American
Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society: standards for quantitative assessment of lung structure..
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 181: 394–418, 2010.
35. Hsia CCW, Hyde DM, Ochs M, Weibel ER. An Oﬃcial Research Policy Statement of the
American Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society: Standards for Quantitative Assessment of
Lung Structure. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine 181: 394–418, 2010.

15

446
447
448
449
450
451
452
453
454
455
456
457
458
459
460
461
462
463
464
465
466
467
468
469
470
471
472
473
474
475
476
477
478
479

33. Hyde DM, Tyler NK, Putney LF, Singh P, Gundersen HJ. Total number and mean size
of alveoli in mammalian lung estimated using fractionator sampling and unbiased estimates of the Euler
characteristic of alveolar openings.. Anat Rec A Discov Mol Cell Evol Biol 277: 216–26, 2004.
2. Kauﬀman SL, Burri PH, Weibel ER. The postnatal growth of the rat lung II. Autoradiography.
The Anatomical Record 180: 63–76, 1974.
37. Kluyver T, Ragan-Kelley B, Pérez F, Granger B, Bussonnier M, Frederic J, Kelley K,
Hamrick J, Grout J, Corlay S, Ivanov P, Avila D, Abdalla S, Willing C. Jupyter Notebooks –
a publishing format for reproducible computational workﬂows. In: Positioning and Power in Academic
Publishing: Players, Agents and Agendas, edited by Loizides F, Schmidt B. IOS Press, 2016, p. 87–90.
13. Kreyling WG, Möller W, Holzwarth U, Hirn S, Wenk A, Schleh C, Schäﬄer M, Haberl
N, Gibson N, Schittny JC. Age-Dependent Rat Lung Deposition Patterns of Inhaled 20 Nanometer
Gold Nanoparticles and their Quantitative Biokinetics in Adult Rats. ACS Nano 12: 7771–7790, 2018.
42. Kruskal WH, Wallis WA. Use of Ranks in One-Criterion Variance Analysis. Journal of the
American Statistical Association 47: 583–621, 1952.
47. Mandelbrot B. How Long Is the Coast of Britain? Statistical Self-Similarity and Fractional
Dimension. Science 156: 636–638, 1967.
41. Mann HB, Whitney DR. On a Test of Whether one of Two Random Variables is Stochastically
Larger than the Other. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics 18: 50–60, 1947.
26. Marone F, Hintermüller C, McDonald S, Abela R, Mikuljan G, Isenegger A, Stampanoni
M. X-ray Tomographic Microscopy at TOMCAT. Journal of Physics: Conference Series 186: 012042,
2009.
27. Marone F, Mokso R, Fife JL, Irvine S, Modregger P, Pinzer BR, Mader K, Isenegger A,
Mikuljan G, Stampanoni M. Synchrotron-based X-ray Tomographic Microscopy at the Swiss Light
Source for Industrial Applications. Synchrotron Radiation News 24: 24–29, 2011.
17. Mercer RR, Crapo JD. Three-dimensional reconstruction of the rat acinus.. J Appl Physiol
(1985) 63: 785–94, 1987.
51. Osmanagic E, Sukstanskii AL, Quirk JD, Woods JC, Pierce RA, Conradi MS, Weibel
ER, Yablonskiy DA. Quantitative assessment of lung microstructure in healthy mice using an MRbased 3He lung morphometry technique. Journal of Applied Physiology 109: 1592–1599, 2010.
21. Puliyakote ASK, Vasilescu DM, Newell JD, Wang G, Weibel ER, Hoﬀman EA. Morphometric diﬀerences between central vs. surface acini in A/J mice using high-resolution micro-computed
tomography. Journal of Applied Physiology 121: 115–122, 2016.
19. Rodriguez M, Bur S, Favre A, Weibel ER. Pulmonary acinus: Geometry and morphometry of
the peripheral airway system in rat and rabbit. American Journal of Anatomy 180: 143–155, 1987.

481

40. SHAPIRO SS, WILK MB. An analysis of variance test for normality (complete samples).
Biometrika 52: 591–611, 1965.

482

3. Schittny JC. Development of the lung. Cell and Tissue Research 367: 427–444, 2017.

483

4. Schittny JC. How high resolution 3-dimensional imaging changes our understanding of postnatal
lung development. Histochemistry and Cell Biology 150: 677–691, 2018.

480

484
485
486
487
488
489
490

5. Schittny JC, Mund SI, Stampanoni M. Evidence and structural mechanism for late lung alveolarization. American Journal of Physiology-Lung Cellular and Molecular Physiology 294: L246–L254,
2008.
12. Semmler-Behnke M, Kreyling WG, Schulz H, Takenaka S, Butler JP, Henry FS,
Tsuda A. Nanoparticle delivery in infant lungs. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109:
5092–5097, 2012.

16

491
492
493
494
495
496
497
498
499
500
501
502
503
504
505
506
507
508
509
510
511
512
513
514
515
516
517
518
519
520
521
522
523
524
525
526
527
528
529
530
531
532
533
534

34. Sterio DC. The unbiased estimation of number and sizes of arbitrary particles using the disector.
[Online]. Journal of microscopy 134: 127–36, 1984. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2818.1984.
tb02501.x.
7. Storey WF, Staub NC. Ventilation of terminal air units. Journal of Applied Physiology 17:
391–397, 1962.
54. Sznitman J. Convective gas transport in the pulmonary acinus: Comparing roles of convective and
diﬀusive lengths. Journal of Biomechanics 42: 789–792, 2009.
53. Sznitman J, Heimsch F, Altorfer D, Schittny JC, Rösgen T. Alveolar ﬂow simulations
during rhythmical breathing motion in reconstructed XTM acinar airspaces. Journal of Biomechanics
39: S441, 2006.
48. Sznitman J, Sutter R, Altorfer D, Stampanoni M, Rösgen T, Schittny JC. Visualization of
respiratory ﬂows from 3D reconstructed alveolar airspaces using X-ray tomographic microscopy. Journal
of Visualization 13: 337–345, 2010.
31. TSCHANZ SA, BURRI PH, WEIBEL ER. A simple tool for stereological assessment of digital
images: the STEPanizer. Journal of Microscopy 243: 47–59, 2011.
10. Tschanz SA, Salm LA, Roth-Kleiner M, Barré SF, Burri PH, Schittny JC. Rat lungs
show a biphasic formation of new alveoli during postnatal development. Journal of Applied Physiology
117: 89–95, 2014.
50. Tsuda A, Filipovic N, Haberthür D, Dickie R, Matsui Y, Stampanoni M, Schittny JC.
Finite element 3D reconstruction of the pulmonary acinus imaged by synchrotron X-ray tomography.
Journal of Applied Physiology 105: 964–976, 2008.
20. Vasilescu DM, Gao Z, Saha PK, Yin L, Wang G, Haefeli-Bleuer B, Ochs M, Weibel
ER, Hoﬀman EA. Assessment of morphometry of pulmonary acini in mouse lungs by nondestructive
imaging using multiscale microcomputed tomography. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
109: 17105–17110, 2012.
22. Vasilescu DM, Klinge C, Knudsen L, Yin L, Wang G, Weibel ER, Ochs M, Hoﬀman
EA. Stereological assessment of mouse lung parenchyma via nondestructive multiscale micro-CT imaging
validated by light microscopic histology. Journal of Applied Physiology 114: 716–724, 2013.
43. Virtanen P, Gommers R, Oliphant TE, Haberland M, Reddy T, Cournapeau D,
Burovski E, Peterson P, Weckesser W, Bright J, van der Walt SJ, Brett M, Wilson J,
Millman KJ, Mayorov N, Nelson ARJ, Jones E, Kern R, Larson E, Carey CJ, Polat İ, Feng
Y, Moore EW, VanderPlas J, Laxalde D, Perktold J, Cimrman R, Henriksen I, Quintero
EA, Harris CR, Archibald AM, Ribeiro AH, Pedregosa F, van Mulbregt P, Contributors
SP1. 0. SciPy 1.0–Fundamental Algorithms for Scientiﬁc Computing in Python. 2019.
18. Woodward JD, Maina JN. A 3D digital reconstruction of the components of the gas exchange
tissue of the lung of the muscovy duck Cairina moschata. Journal of Anatomy 206: 477–492, 2005.
52. Yang L, Feuchtinger A, Möller W, Ding Y, Kutschke D, Möller G, Schittny JC,
Burgstaller G, Hofmann W, Stoeger T, Razansky D, Walch A, Schmid O. Three-Dimensional
Quantitative Co-Mapping of Pulmonary Morphology and Nanoparticle Distribution with Cellular Resolution in Nondissected Murine Lungs. ACS Nano ( January 2019). doi: 10.1021/acsnano.8b07524.
45. Zeltner TB, Bertacchini M, Messerli A, Burri PH. Morphometric estimation of regional
diﬀerences in the rat lung.. Exp Lung Res 16: 145–58, 1990.
44. Šidák Z. Rectangular Conﬁdence Regions for the Means of Multivariate Normal Distributions.
Journal of the American Statistical Association 62: 626–633, 1967.

17

