## Materials & Methods
### Rat lung samples

In the present study, a superset of the animals described by Haberthür et al. [@doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.00642.2013] were used.
Tschanz et al. [@doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.01355.2013] described a biphasic formation of new alveoli on the same set of animals.
The stereological analysis presented here represents a part of the 3R-initiative (replacement, reduction, and refinement) [@https://www.altex.org/index.php/altex/article/view/1106] for the ethical use and the reduction of the number of animals sacrificed for science.

Briefly, we extracted the lungs of Sprague-Dawley rats after having deeply anesthetized them with a mixture of medetomidine, midazolam, and fentanyl [@isbn:9783794527816].
The rats were euthanized by exsanguination during the removal of the lung.
The lungs were fixed with 2.5 % glutaraldehyde by intratracheal instillation and kept under constant pressure (20 cm H~2~O) during fixation to prevent recoiling of the tissue.
The samples were prepared for tomographic imaging by post-fixation with 1 % osmium tetroxide and staining with 4 % uranyl acetate, as well as by dehydration in a graded series of ethanol and embedding in paraffin.
In total we assessed 12 animals, on postnatal days P4, P10, P21, and P60 (N=3 per day.
From now on, we will omit the postnatal prefix and only mention the day.).

The animals were housed in the central animal facility of the University of Bern.
They received food and water ad libitum at a 12/12 hours day/night cycle.
The experiments themselves, as well as the handling of the animals before and during the experiments, were approved and supervised by the Federal Food Safety and Veterinary Office of Switzerland and the Department of Agriculture and Nature of the Kanton of Bern in Switzerland.

### Tomographic imaging

Tomographic imaging was performed at the [TOMCAT](https://www.psi.ch/sls/tomcat/) beamline (A beamline for TOmographic Microscopy and Coherent rAdiology experimenTs) [@doi:10.1088/1742-6596/186/1/012042; @doi:10.1080/08940886.2011.634315] of the [Swiss Light Source](https://www.psi.ch/sls/) at the [Paul Scherrer Institute](https://www.psi.ch/) in Villigen, Switzerland.
The samples were scanned at an X-ray energy of 20.0 keV.
After penetrating the sample, the X-rays were converted into visible light by either a 20 μm-thick LuAG:Ce or 18 μm-thick YAG:Ce scintillator screen (both from [Crytur](http://www.crytur.cz/), Turnov, Czech Republic), depending on the date of experiments.
The resulting visible light was magnified using a 10-times magnifying, diffraction-limited microscope lens and recorded with a 2048 × 2048 pixel CCD camera ([pco.2000](https://www.pco.de/specialized-cameras/pco2000/), PCO, Kelheim, Germany) with 14 bits dynamic range operated in 2 by 2 binning mode.
As a result, in a single field of view, we were able to image a sample volume of a cube of 1.5 mm side length with a voxel side length of 1.48 μm, with the exposure time of the single projections varying between 160 and 200 ms.

Since our samples were larger than the field of view of the detector, we applied the so-called wide-field scanning method [@doi:10.1107/S0909049510019618] to increase the field of view horizontally.
For each sub-scan, we recorded 3578 projections and laterally stitched them so that their combined field of view covered the whole sample width.
Additionally, two or three such wide-field scans were stacked vertically to match the sample height.

The resulting data sets for each of the lung samples covered a field of view of a cube with approximately 4.5 mm side length which corresponds to an image stack with approximately 3000 × 3000 × 3000 pixels at 1.48 μm side length each.
The mean size of the tomographic reconstructions, corresponding to the raw data of each of the 42 analyzed tomographic scans is 8 GB, totaling to 336 GB.

### Extraction of acini

For the present manuscript, we extracted single acini from three-dimensional data, acquired without destroying the samples.
Details of this semi-automatic extraction of the rat acini are described by Haberthür et al. [@doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.00642.2013].
Individual acini were extracted from the tomographic data with a custom image processing network established in [MeVisLab](https://www.mevislab.de/) (version 2.1, 2010-07-26 release, MeVis Medical Solutions and Fraunhofer MEVIS-Institute for Medical Image Computing, Bremen, Germany).
To isolate individual acini, we followed the airway tree in the data and manually placed disk-shaped segmentation stoppers at the acinus entrances.
Thus, acini were selected independently of their size and only based on their location in the airway tree.
The acinus extraction was performed by segmenting the acinus volume with a gray-level threshold-based region growing algorithm with a seed point perpendicular to the manually placed segmentation stopper.
Each individual acinus was then exported as a single DICOM file for portability.
For each acinus, its exported DICOM file contained the segmented acinus overlaid with the original background for further analysis.
Example images from the DICOM files are shown in the bottom row of figure @fig:01.

This semi-automatic acinus segmentation method was applied to lung samples obtained throughout lung development, at postnatal days 4, 10, 21 and 60.
In total we extracted 701 acini from 12 animals, a breakdown of the number of extracted and assessed acini per animal is given in table @tbl:counts.
Even if our method is efficient, we could not have stereologically assessed all these 701 acini, we thus performed a subsampling and stereologically analyzed 268 acini, as specified in the section below.

### Stereological analysis of alveolar characteristics

The stereological estimation of the alveolar number was performed according to the standards for quantitative assessment of lung structure from the [American Thoracic Society](http://www.thoracic.org/) [@doi:10.1164/rccm.200809-1522st] to guarantee accurate and unbiased results.
As a basis for the estimation the volumes of the lung lobes were first determined by water displacement [@pubmed:5530651].
The lobe-volume was estimated a second time by the Cavalieri method.
Both volumes were used to calculate the shrinkage, which was used for the correction of the volume data [@doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.01355.2013].

To perform the stereological analysis, each DICOM file from the isolated acini was sampled into a systematic random set of single images using a MATLAB script [@DICOMReaderAndSaver].
The stereological assessment was performed with the [STEPanizer](http://stepanizer.com/) [@doi:10.1111/j.1365-2818.2010.03481.x], an easy-to-use software tool for the stereological assessment of digital images.
Details of the stereological assessment have previously been described [@doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.00642.2013].
Briefly, we counted the appearance or disappearance of alveolar wall interruptions.
Under the assumption that these only occur in the region of the alveolar mouth opening and correspond to alveolar entrance rings [@doi:10.1002/ar.a.20012] we counted said interruptions on paired images spanning the whole acinus volume.
By using the disector method [@doi:10.1111/j.1365-2818.1984.tb02501.x] we were thus able to estimate the number of alveoli in 268 of the 701 exported acini.
The acini we analyzed were subsampled from the full data by systematic uniform random sampling [@doi:10.1164/rccm.200809-1522st].
A defined fraction (i.e. one third) of all the extracted acini of one animal were analyzed.
During segmentation, the acini were numbered.
Based on these numbers every third acinus was selected, randomly starting with the first, second, or third one.

Previously, we have shown that the stereological assessment of the acinar volume (according to the Cavalieri principle [@doi:10.1046/j.1365-2818.1999.00460.x]) gives comparable results to an automated volume extraction by counting the segmented pixels in the tomographic data sets [@doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.00642.2013].
Due to variations in the gray value, the automatic segmentation underestimates the volume of the single acini.
The best-suited approach to obtain unbiased results is to assess the volume manually according to the Cavalieri principle, which is what we did for the 268 acini presented in this manuscript.
The sets of JPG slices and the raw results from the stereological analysis with the STEPanizer are available on request.

### Data analysis and display

All the stereologically assessed data was processed in a [Jupyter](http://jupyter.org/) [@https://eprints.soton.ac.uk/403913/] notebook, producing all the results, including the statistical data and plots shown below.
The notebook with all its history is freely available on GitHub [@zenodo].
The performed calculations are described in detail in the [Results] section.
In the plots, semitransparent circles mark the single observations.
The box shows the 25 %--75 % quartiles range of the data.
The whiskers extend to the rest of the distribution.
Outliers are determined as a function of the inter-quartile range and are shown outside the whiskers.
Numerical values in the text are given as averages ± standard deviation.
P-values in the text and figure legends are given as precise numbers, as suggested by Amhrein et al. [@doi:10.1038/d41586-019-00857-9].

Usually, we performed a Shapiro-Wilk test for normality [@doi:10.1093/biomet/52.3-4.591] to test whether we can use an U-test for assessing the differences, namely a two-sided Mann-Whitney rank test [@doi:10.1214/aoms/1177730491].
This rank test was used to assess the differences between the possible combinations.
An additional Kruskal-Wallis H-test for independent samples [@doi:10.1080/01621459.1952.10483441] was used to test for sample independence.
The statistical analysis was performed in the aforementioned notebook by using the statistical functions of the Scientific Computing Tools for Python [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2] or GraphPad Prism 7.01 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA).
