## Results

The number of alveoli per acinus was assessed for 268 individual acini at days 4, 10, 21 and 60.
For day 4, we analyzed 125 acini, for day 10 we analyzed 58 acini, for day 21 we analyzed 42 acini, and for day 60 we analyzed 43 acini.

An overview of our process is shown in figure @fig:01.
Panels A--D depict a representative light microscopy image for each assessed time point.
Panels E--H of figure @fig:01 each correspond to one slice of the tomographic data sets acquired at TOMCAT.
Panels I--L of figure @fig:01 show the middle slice of the datasets used for the stereological analysis of the extracted acini.
The acinus is shown in light gray as an overlay over the tomographic data.

![Example images for each of the assessed time points.
  A--D: Representative light microscopy images.
  E--H: One slice of the tomographic data sets.
  I--L: Middle slice of one of the extracted acini.
  The extracted acinus is overlaid on the tomographic dataset.
  Panels J and K also show the segmentation stopper at the left border of the image.
  The shown images correspond to the middle slice of the full data sets used for the stereological analysis.
  The scale bar was burnt in during preparation of the image stacks and is 100 μm long.
  Panels A, E & I: Day 4.
  Panels B, F & J: Day 10.
  Panels C, G & K: Day 21.
  Panels D, H & L: Day 60.](images/fig01.png){#fig:01}

### Alveoli per acinus

The average entrance ring count, which corresponds to the number of alveoli per acinus for the 125 acini at day 4 is 48 ± 41 alveoli.
For the 58 acini at day 10 it is 89 ± 84 alveoli, for the 42 acini at day 21 it is 233 ± 164 alveoli.
At day 60 we assessed 43 acini in total, on average they have 702 ± 219 alveoli.

The values for the single animal are given in table @tbl:counts and plotted in figure @fig:02.

|Animal|Assessed acini|Average counts|STD   |Minimum|Maximum|
|------|--------------|--------------|------|-------|-------|
|04A   |51            |26.73         |23.56 |4      |111    |
|04B   |23            |65.04         |43.85 |15     |171    |
|04C   |51            |60.51         |45.42 |10     |249    |
|10A   |27            |77.85         |56.31 |18     |245    |
|10B   |14            |84.57         |65.75 |23     |199    |
|10C   |17            |108.76        |125.45|15     |505    |
|21B   |14            |208.14        |197.71|35     |781    |
|21D   |17            |196.00        |128.56|50     |493    |
|21E   |11            |323.09        |145.94|108    |572    |
|60B   |24            |701.75        |230.95|322    |1296   |
|60D   |10            |668.30        |121.67|444    |810    |
|60E   |9             |739.11        |281.22|272    |1204   |

Table: Detailed alveolar numbers for each animal. {#tbl:counts}

![Distribution of the number of alveoli per acinus (entrance ring count per acinus) for each animal.
  Left: linear scale, right: logarithmic scale.
  The entrance ring counts per day are all significantly different (all p-values better than 1.9e-5, which is the one between days 4 and 10).](images/fig02.png){#fig:02}

The alveolar number shows highly significant differences Šidák-corrected p-value \< 0.00167 [@doi:10.1080/01621459.1967.10482935]) between all possible combination of days.
All possible combinations of entrance ring counts per day are significantly different (all p-values are better than p=1.9e-5, which is the p-value of the difference between days 4 and 10).
The entrance ring counts for all animals are independent (p=1.6e-34).

### Acinus volume
The stereological assessment resulted in a mean acinar volume of 0.03 ± 0.04 mm^3^ for the 125 acini at day 4.
For the 58 acini at day 10 we get a volume of 0.04 ± 0.05 mm^3^.
For the 42 acini at day 21 a volume of 0.10 ± 0.09 mm^3^ and for the 43 acini at day 60 a volume of 0.74 ± 0.37 mm^3^.

The values for the single animals are shown in table @tbl:volumes and displayed in figure @fig:03.

|Animal|Assessed acini|Average [mm^3^]|STD [mm^3^]|Minimum [mm^3^]|Maximum [mm^3^]|
|------|--------------|---------------|-----------|---------------|---------------|
|04A   |51            |0.009          |0.008      |0.002          |0.035          |
|04B   |23            |0.058          |0.053      |0.008          |0.194          |
|04C   |51            |0.044          |0.044      |0.006          |0.275          |
|10A   |27            |0.033          |0.026      |0.004          |0.108          |
|10B   |14            |0.033          |0.030      |0.004          |0.096          |
|10C   |17            |0.057          |0.084      |0.002          |0.333          |
|21B   |14            |0.087          |0.086      |0.011          |0.322          |
|21D   |17            |0.109          |0.112      |0.014          |0.380          |
|21E   |11            |0.118          |0.072      |0.025          |0.238          |
|60B   |24            |0.588          |0.223      |0.226          |1.104          |
|60D   |10            |0.888          |0.350      |0.364          |1.576          |
|60E   |9             |0.977          |0.526      |0.186          |1.875          |

Table: Detailed volume data (in mm^3^) for each animal. {#tbl:volumes}

The mean volume of the 20 % smallest acini to the 20 % largest acini at day 4 differs by a factor of 27.47 (from 0.0035 μl--0.095 μl, N=25).
At day 10, this increase is 15.28 times (from 0.0071 μl--0.11 μl, N=12).
At day 21, this increase is 14.42 times (from 0.018 μl--0.26 μl, N=8).
At day 60, we saw an increase of 3.94 times (from 0.33 μl--1.3 μl, N=9).

![Distribution of the acinar volumes for each animal.
  Left: linear scale, right: logarithmic scale.
  The acinar volumes are all significantly different (all p-values better than 4.5e-6, which is the one between days 10 and 21) for each combination of days except between days 4 and 10 (p=0.08).](images/fig03.png){#fig:03}

The acinar volumes show highly significant differences between all possible combinations of days except between days 4 and 10 (p=0.08).
All other p-values are better than p=4.5e-6, which is the p-value for the difference between days 10 and 21.
The statistical analysis is equal to what is briefly described for the entrance ring count above.
The acinar volumes for animals 21E and all animals of day 60 are non-normally distributed, but all acinar volumes per animal are independent (p=5e-29).

 To assess the volume distribution per day, we normalized the volumes per day to the largest volume per day (figure @fig:04).
The whiskers in the plots contain all data points 1.5 times the interquartile range past tow low and high quartiles, points outside the whiskers are considered outliers.
The non-outlier data points are closest together on day 4 and slightly more spread out at day 10.
At days 21 and 60, we see no outliers for the normalized acinar volumes.
At days 4, 10 and 21 the distribution of the normalized volumes is skewed towards below the average (median of normalized volumes at day 4: 0.16, at day 10: 0.18 and at day 21: 0.23), we thus see more smaller than larger acini early in the development.
At day 60, the distribution is more homogeneous, with the median of the normalized acinus volumes at exactly 0.50.

![Normalized acinar volumes.
  The spread of the volumes is small early in the development and skewed towards the lower end of the volumes.
  At day 60, the median is exactly in the middle of the normalized volumes.](images/fig04.png){#fig:04}

### Alveoli per volume

The mean number of alveoli for the 125 acini at day 4 is 2166 ± 1132 alveoli mm^-3^.
For the 58 acini at day 10 we counted 2831 ± 1189 alveoli mm^-3^, for the 42 acini at day 21 2723 ± 771 alveoli mm^-3^ and for the 43 acini at day 60 1080 ± 349 alveoli mm^-3^.
These numbers were found by dividing the counted entrance rings by the acinus volumes.

The numbers for the single animals are shown in table @tbl:density and displayed in figure @fig:05.

|Animal|Assessed acini|Average [mm^-3^]|STD [mm^-3^]|Minimum [mm^-3^]|Maximum [mm^-3^]|
|------|--------------|----------------|------------|----------------|----------------|
|04A   |51            |3124            |1152        |1618            |8208            |
|04B   |23            |1363            |499         |679             |2704            |
|04C   |51            |1569            |380         |799             |2775            |
|10A   |27            |2685            |1022        |1246            |5582            |
|10B   |14            |3091            |1166        |1890            |5422            |
|10C   |17            |2848            |1462        |1182            |7009            |
|21B   |14            |2642            |493         |1625            |3344            |
|21D   |17            |2534            |895         |1111            |4032            |
|21E   |11            |3119            |775         |1604            |4379            |
|60B   |24            |1249            |297         |530             |1912            |
|60D   |10            |838             |271         |476             |1221            |
|60E   |9             |898             |323         |411             |1463            |


Table: Details of alveolar density (number per mm^3^) per acinus volume for each animal. {#tbl:density}

![Number of alveoli per acinus volume.
  Left: linear scale, right: logarithmic scale.
  The number of alveoli per acinus volume are all significantly different (all p-values are better than 5e-5, which is the one between days 4 and 21) for each combination of days except between days 10 and 21 (p=0.7).](images/fig05.png){#fig:05}

The counts per volume, which correspond to the number of alveoli per acinus volume are one of several measure for influencing the complexity of the single acini.
The number of alveoli per acinus show highly significant differences between all possible combinations of days except between days 10 and 21 (p=0.7).
All other days have a p-value better than p=5e-5, this being the one between days 4 and 21.
The statistical analysis is equal to what is briefly described for the entrance ring count above.
The counts per volume for all animals except 04A are non-normally distributed, but all are independent (p=2.9e-21).

### Number of acini

The number of acini for day 4 was 18260 ± 16555 acini for day 10 14359 ± 5611 acini, for day 21 11203 ± 2681 acini and for day 60 4277 ± 777 acini.
These numbers were obtained by dividing the parenchymal volume of the lungs [@doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.01355.2013] with the Cavalieri-estimated volume of the acini.
To calculate these data we had to use data of two different studies.

### Total number of alveoli per lung

The total alveolar number for day 4 was found to be 0.64 ± 0.34 million alveoli, for day 10 1.23 ± 0.39 million alveoli, for day 21 2.65 ± 0.57 million alveoli, and for day 60 3.01 ± 0.34 million alveoli.
The total number of acini was estimated by dividing the mean parenchymal volume of the lungs [@doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.01355.2013] by the stereologically estimated acinar volume.
The number of alveoli for each animal is then calculated by multiplying the average entrance ring count per animal with the estimated number of acini per animal.

### Volume of individual alveoli

The average volume of one alveolus including its part of the alveolar duct was estimated by dividing the mean acinar volume by the mean count of alveoli for each day separately, while correcting for the ductal volume.
For day 4 we estimate the volume of an individual alveolus at 4.98 × 10^5^ μm^3^, for day 10 at 3.34 × 10^5^ μm^3^, for day 21 at 3.07 × 10^5^ μm^3^ and for day 60 at 8.12 × 10^5^ μm^3^.
This corresponds to an average diameter per alveolus of 98 μm, 86 μm, 84 μm and 116 μm for days 4, 10, 21 and 60, respectively.
The average diameter was estimated by assuming spherical alveoli and solving the volume equation of a sphere to its diameter.