## Discussion

To our best knowledge, the present manuscript is the first to quantitatively describe the number of alveoli in individual acini and changes in the volumes of single rat lung acini.
Based on stereological analysis of a large number of individual acini we were able to efficiently extract qualitative and quantitative data of large amounts of single acini from non-destructive three-dimensional tomographic data sets in a highly reproducible manner.

We can easily estimate the total number of acini during lung development from our data.
The limitations of this study are mainly twofold: a) due to technical reasons (i.e. available beamtime and limitations of the setup we could not image the entire lung and b) lung location (i.e.  lower medial tip of the right lobe).
However, our sample is more than suitable for the drawn conclusions because it was previously shown that the right lower lobe is a valid sample for the entire lung [@doi:10.1152/ajplung.00325.2016] and that information drawn from one lobe is representative of the whole lung [@doi:10.3109/01902149009087879].
Furthermore, based on stereological data, Zeltner et al. [@doi:10.3109/01902149009087879] were able to show that the lung parenchyma is quite homogeneous.
Looking at individual acini, Kizhakke Puliyakote et al. [@doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.00317.2016] observed that the peripheral, pleura facing acini possess an acinar volume which is two thirds larger than the volume of the central ones.
However, they did not report additional regional differences, e.g. between acini located cranially and caudally.
Own preliminary data point to the same result.
We imaged an entire rat lung *in situ* immediately post mortem using high-resolution synchrotron radiation based X-ray tomographic microscopy [@doi:10.1007/s00418-020-01868-8].
A first analysis of regional difference shows similar results as mentioned above.

### Acinus volumes

The mean acinar volume significantly increases during lung development from postnatal days 10 to 60 with all p-values better than 4.5e-6.
No significant difference was observed between postnatal days 4 and 10 (1.2$\times$increase, p=0.08).
A large part of the acinus volume increase happens after day 21 (compare figure @fig:03), which is consistent with previous literature [@doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.01355.2013; @doi:10.1002/ar.1091780405].

As mentioned in the introduction, Barré et al. [@doi:10.1152/ajplung.00325.2016] have shown that the number of acini remains constant during lung development, albeit in a different strain of animals (Wistar Bern compared to Sprague-Dawley in this study).
The total volume of the alveolar space increases by roughly a factor of 11 during alveolarization [@doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.01355.2013].
Therefore, we expect the mean volume of the acini to increase by at least the same factor.

We observed a mean increase of the acinus volumes of 22.66 times between days 4 and 60 (p=1.8e-22).
The other combinations of increases were: day 4 to day 21: 3.18$\times$(p=1.3e-9), day 10 to day 21: 2.60$\times$(p=4.5e-6), day 10 to day 60: 18.46$\times$(p=1.4e-17), day 21 to day 60: 7.11$\times$(p=7.1e-15).
The increase from day 4 to day 10 was not significant (p=0.08) at 1.23$\times$).

During the same time, the coefficients of variation of the acinus volumes dropped from 1.26 to 0.49.
At day 4, the mean volumes of the 20 % largest acini are 27.47 times larger than the volumes of the 20 % smallest acini (N=25).
At day 60, the 20 % largest acini are 3.94 times larger than the 20 % smallest acini (N=9).
The size distribution of the largest to smallest acini thus decreases nearly 7 times over the course of the lung development.
This indicates that the dispersion of the value is based on an entirely different pattern of distribution of acinar sizes and that the difference of the mean acinus volumes from the smallest to the largest fraction per day becomes smaller and smaller during postnatal lung development.

When comparing the acinus volumes normalized to the largest volume per day, we found that the volumes are closer together on day 4 and are spread out more on the other days (figure @fig:04).
The normalized volumes (without outliers) are most compact on day 4 and slightly more spread out at day 10.
At days 21 and 60, we see no outliers for the normalized acinar volumes, which thus range from zero to one.
The median of the normalized volumes is smaller than the average at days 4, 10 and 21 while it is exactly at 0.5 for day 60.
This means that we have more smaller than larger acini early in the development and a very homogeneous distribution late in lung development.
This result suggests that acinar growth is not constant during lung development.
It seems that some acini increase their volume faster than others.
As a result, we speculate that an increased percentage of acini is somehow dormant at day 4&dash;21, while at day 60 most of the acini reached their final volume.

By dividing the parenchymal volumes of each lung estimated by Tschanz et al.
(Table 1, [@doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.01355.2013]) by the mean number of acini estimated by Barré et al. [@doi:10.14814/phy2.12063] we can estimate the mean acinar volume for each day.
The acinus volume we estimated by point counting (Cavalieri estimation) are on average 2.07 times lower but show a similar increase over the studied period (see figure @fig:06).
It appears that the comparison between data obtained by stereology based on classical paraffin sections or on any kind of 3D-imaging has its limitation if it comes to the absolute numbers.
First, due to the *coast of Britain*-effect the exact value of every surface measurement is depending on the resolution of the imaging method [@doi:10.1126/science.156.3775.636].
Second, the thickness of the alveolar septa in 3D-imaging data is heavily depending on the segmentation between airspace and tissue&mdash;regardless if it is done manually or by a computed algorithm.
We observed that the airspace volumes obtained by 3D-imaging has a tendency to be smaller than the ones determined using classical paraffin sections.
However, the relative numbers obtained in one study match the ones of other studies quite well.

![Plot of the mean acinar volumes.
  By dividing the parenchymal volumes of each lung estimated by Tschanz et al.
(Table 1, [@doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.01355.2013]) by the mean number of acini estimated by Barre et al. [@doi:10.14814/phy2.12063] we can estimate the mean acinar volume for each measured time point (blue plot).
  We assessed the volumes of the acini by point counting (Cavalieri estimation, orange plot).
  Left: original data.
  Right: Our data, scaled by a linear correction factor.
  Our volumes of the acini are on average 2.07 times lower but show a similar increase over the studied period.
  While the estimation based on Tschanz et al.
is from the entire right middle lobe and on Barre et al.
globally for the whole organ, our estimation is solely based on the stereological analysis of the acini in the lower medial tip of the right lower lung lobe.](images/fig06.png){#fig:06}

### Number of alveoli per acinus volume

The volume and shape of the alveoli, alveolar ducts, and the acini are critical parameters for ventilation and particle deposition [@doi:10.1007/s12650-010-0043-0; @doi:10.1115/1.4007949; @doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.90546.2008].
Particle deposition, for example, is relatively low during the first two weeks of a rats' life, high at postnatal day P21 and medium at days P36&ndash;P90 [@doi:10.1021/acsnano.8b01826; @doi:10.1073/pnas.1119339109].
This correlates well with our results, where we found a significantly larger number of alveoli per acinus volume at days 10 and 21 compared to days 4 and 60 (p-values all better than 5.4e-5, which is the one for day 4 vs. day 21).
Kreyling et al. [@doi:10.1021/acsnano.8b01826] report maximal gold nanoparticle retention at this time point (see [their figure 1](https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnano.8b01826#fig1)).

Tschanz et al. [@doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.01355.2013] stereologically estimated the mean total acinar volume as the sum of ductal and alveolar air spaces.
The mean volume of the individual alveoli was found to be the smallest around postnatal day 21 (see [their figure 4](https://www.physiology.org/na101/home/literatum/publisher/physio/journals/content/jappl/2014/jappl.2014.117.issue-1/japplphysiol.01355.2013/production/images/medium/zdg0121410620004.jpeg)).
If we take the number of alveoli as one possible measure of acinar complexity, we postulate a high acinar complexity at days 10 and 21 while early and late in the lung development, the acinar complexity is relatively low.
This also correlates with structural changes.
In rats, the alveolar air spaces are large during the first two weeks of life, small at day P21 and medium afterward [@doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.01355.2013].

### Number of acini

Previously, it was shown that the number of acini (e.g. counted acinar entraces) remains constant during postnatal lung development from day 4 to 60 [@doi:10.1152/ajplung.00325.2016], with a mean of 5840 ± 547 acini per lung (in another strain of animals, full lung data available for days 4 and 60).
Even though we did not aim to assess the number of acini in this manuscript, calculating this number helps to validate our assessment and helps us to collate the data that can be derived from our stereological analysis to prior results.

Based on the acinar and parenchymal volume we calculated the number of acini and were able to verify the previously reported results to lie within our margin of error at days 4 and 60 (Barré et al: 6236 ± 497 acini and 5612 ± 547 acini, respectively).
As shown in figure @fig:07, our values $\pm$ their standard deviation are overlapping the previously found values, even though we generally see a trend that the number of acini seems to decrease during lung development.
This might be due to fusing of several acini to one or simply because we missed some acini in the analysis of the large datasets.

![Plot of the estimated number of acini.
  The blue plot shows our estimation, based on the division of the parenchymal volume by the average volume of the acini.
  The orange plot is based on the data shown by Barre et al. [@doi:10.14814/phy2.12063; @doi:10.1152/ajplung.00325.2016].](images/fig07.png){#fig:07} 

### Total alveolar number

In this study, we assessed the number of alveoli per acinus. The alveolar By multiplication of the number of acini by the number of alveoli we estimate a total amount of alveoli per lung of `\SIlist{0.64 +- 0.34; 1.23 +- 0.39; 2.65 +-  0.57; 3.01 +- 0.58}{million\  alveoli}`{=latex} for days 4, 10, 21, & 60, respectively.
Tschanz et al. estimated these total numbers of alveoli per lung as `\SIlist{0.823 +- 0.01; 3.538 +- 1.26; 14.303 +- 3.08; 19.297 +- 3.06}{million\ alveoli}`{=latex} for days 4, 10, 21, & 60, respectively [@doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.01355.2013], Table 1).
On average, our results are five times smaller but show the same trend when linearly scaled with a factor of 5.04.
The values from Tschanz et al.
overlap well with our linearly scaled values, as shown in figure @fig:08.

As shown in a study by Osmanagic et al. [@doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.00736.2010] the total alveolar number shows a large variability between different labs.
E.g. the reported total number of alveoli in adult C57BL6 mice differs by a factor of approximately 8.
All the studies mentioned my Osmanagic et al. were performed in labs well-known for their quality of stereology-based investigations of lung morphology.
Therefore, any simple bias or methodical error may not account for the reported differences.
It seems to be that the total number of alveoli is dependent on unknown small methodical differences and minute differences in how the operator actually does count.

However, relative numbers as reported in this study are more reliable.
This is especially the case when the comparison is done in groups of animals processed in parallel and counted by the same operator.
We assessed the same lungs as Tschanz et al. [@doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.01355.2013], but based on a very different imaging method and with two different persons performing the stereological assessment.
This may explain the relative factor of 5.04 that we found as a difference.

![Number of alveoli based on data from Tschanz et al. [@doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.01355.2013] together with our linearly scaled data (our data multiplied by 5.04).
  Values are plotted with a band of the width of their standard deviation.](images/fig08.png){#fig:08} 

### Volumes of individual alveoli

By dividing the alveolar air space by the number of alveoli (both from Table 1 of [@doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.01355.2013]) we can estimate a mean alveolar volume of 5.91 × 10^5^ μm^3^ for day 4, of 2.49 × 10^5^ μm^3^ for day 10, of 1.34 × 10^5^ μm^3^ for day 21, and 2.93 × 10^5^ μm^3^ for day 60.
On average, our values (calculated by dividing the mean acinar volume by the mean count of alveoli per acinus) are 1.81 times larger than these estimates of individual alveolar volume (our values day 4: 4.98 × 10^5^ μm^3^, day 10: 3.34 × 10^5^ μm^3^, day 21 3.07 × 10^5^ μm^3^ and day 60 8.12 × 10^5^ μm^3^), but scale equally during postnatal lung development.
Tschanz et al.
estimated the total alveolar volume without the alveolar ducts.
Since we directly estimated the volume fraction of the alveoli per acinus our number is actually expected to be larger.

### Additional characteristics of the acinus

We are well aware that there are many more parameters of the acinar characteristics can be extracted from the acinar datasets we segmented for this study.
Especially of interest are the microarchitecture in the acinus like the branching pattern of the intra-acinar airways or surface area characteristics of the acinar and alveolar walls.
For this study we focused on the easily stereologically available parameters.
Ongoing work in our group is aiming to describe additional parameters of the acinus microarchitecture (e.g. fractal dimension, surface curvature, etc.) but the present study did not aim at characterizing these parameters.

### Physiological relevance of the acinar size

It has been predicted by computational fluid dynamics simulations and by to-scale experiments that the amount and location of massless particle deposition, as well as ventilation, are depending on the size of the acini [@doi:10.1038/srep14071; @doi:10.1115/1.4027328; @doi:10.1016/j.jbiomech.2008.12.022].
The predictions could be confirmed at least in one case, where mice received fluorescent particles during mechanical ventilation.
In 3D-visualizations the particles were predominately detected in the proximal half of the acini [@doi:10.1021/acsnano.8b07524].

Based on the above-mentioned knowledge and the data of this study, we propose the following.
In very small acini as the smallest ones, we observed at postnatal day 4 acinar flows are mainly characterized by radial streamlines [@doi:10.1115/1.3049481; @doi:10.1007/s12650-010-0043-0].
Massless particle deposition is governed by diffusion [@doi:10/cwkbbs].
As the acini increase in size, convective transport becomes more and more dominant in the proximal regions of the acini.
In larger acini, the proximal region shows much higher particle retention than the distal one, because in this region the larger air-flow induces a circular current, which facilitates alveolar particle deposition.
The proximal regions may even be viewed analogously to a filter capturing the particles whereas the distal regions do not receive significant amounts [@doi:10.1038/srep14071; @doi:10.1115/1.4027328; @doi:10.1016/j.jbiomech.2008.12.022; @doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.90546.2008; @doi:10.1115/1.4007949; @doi:10.1073/pnas.1119339109].

Multi-breath gas-washout is also dependent on the size of the acini.
Based on computational simulations of nitrogen multi-breath gas-washout it has been shown that small acini washout faster at the beginning and slower at the end of the washout as compared to larger acini [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007079].
Not surprisingly, the distribution of the acinar sizes in terms of their range has also an influence on the gas-washout.
Furthermore, a clustering versus an even distribution of the locations of acinar similar sizes effects gas-washout.
Therefore, the question where an acinus of which size is located in the lungs has a significant influence on pulmonary ventilation and particle deposition.

The larger distribution of the acinar sizes at day 4 as compared to day 60 let us speculate what this may mean biologically.
Physiologically, a larger distribution implies less homogeneous ventilation and an increased gas-washout time.
Therefore, the decrease of the inhomogeneity of the acinar sizes may be understood as optimization of the gas-exchange region in the lungs of adult animals.

The consideration of the location is not only a theoretical one, because it has been shown in adult mice that the acini close to the pleura are larger than the central ones [@doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.00317.2016].
Therefore, acini of different size are not evenly distributed in the lungs.